Dear Parent,

Your child ${profile.realname} has created a free NextThought account
with the username ${user.username} and needs your permission before he
or she can use all of its rich features. To permit your child to join
the NextThought community, please review the information in this
notice and then sign and return the attached consent form.

About NextThought
=================

NextThought is a social learning platform that allows students to
interact, communicate, and collaborate with others within the content
of their educational materials. Students can access and read materials
online, annotate them, create whiteboards, and share notes with their
classmates and teachers. For more information about NextThought,
please visit www.nextthought.com

Your Child's Account
====================

At NextThought we are committed to providing a safe and secure
environment to support your child's education and appreciate that you
may want to know more about the information we collect.

When your child registered for an account, we asked for his or her
first and last name, birthday, username, password, email address, and
parent's email address. To minimize data collected from children under
13, we handle this information in specific ways, as outlined below:

	* First Name, Last Name, and Username

	Children's names are never displayed publicly on the NextThought
	site. Instead, each child is known by the username he or she
	creates when registering for an account. To protect children's
	safety and identities, we do not permit their usernames to contain
	their personal names. Therefore, we ask for first and last names
	to conduct a screening. We do not save your child's last name
	after the account is created.

	* Child's Email Address

	We hash (or alter) the email address that a child provides. This
	altered email address will be used only for the purpose of
	recovering a password.

	* Parent's Email Address

	We do not save this email address after sending you this email
	notice.

In short, the only information we retain after your child completes
registration is his or her birthday, first name, and email address in
its altered form.

Through this initial process of registration, your child has access to
limited site features, such as reading materials online and making
notes only he or she sees. If you do not want him or her to have
access to NextThought, even in this limited way, please contact us at
the email address below to delete the account; otherwise we will use
the information your child provided for the purposes stated above.

Please take a moment to review our Children's Privacy Policy for more
details about our information collection and sharing practices,
available at
https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1kNo6hwwKwWdhq7jzczAysUWhnsP9RfckIet11pWPW6k

Your Permission for Social Features
===================================

Access to social features requires us to collect parental consent,
since we must collect some of your child's personal information. By
signing and sending the attached form to us via one of the methods
listed on it, you permit us to ask for and store your child's full
name, school affiliation, and email address (in unaltered form) and to
make the social features available to him or her. This personal
information allows us to communicate with our users and connect them
to the educational community. We will also retain your email address,
which appears on the attached form, so that we can inform you of any
material changes that affect the way we use your child's information.
You also have the opportunity to sign up to receive updates from
NextThought.

Your Child's Information
========================

You may review, update or delete your child's personal information at
any time. To do this please send an email with your child's username
to compliance@nextthought.com, and we will contact you about reviewing
or deleting your child's information.

If you have other questions about NextThought or need further
assistance with your childâ€™s account, please feel free to contact us.

Sincerely,
NextThought

For more information about NextThought, please visit our website at
www.nextthought.com.
